In this short video, we'll see how
the const qualifier affects pointers.
We've already seen that the
use of const with function
reference parameters essentially
makes them read-only.
In c++, we can qualify a
pointer in several ways.
First, we don't have
to use const at all.
In this case, we have a pointer just
as we've been using up to this point.
We can change the data the
pointer is pointing to, and we
can change the pointer itself
and make it point somewhere else.
The const qualifier gives us
more fine-grained control of
what we allow to be changed.
We can have pointers to
constants, constant pointers and
constant pointers to constants.
These will be very useful
when we pass pointers to
functions in the next video.
Let's take a look at each one of them.
In the case of pointers to constants,
the data pointed to by the pointer
is constant and can't be changed.
However, the pointer itself
can change and point elsewhere.
Let's take a look at this example.
We have two integers
declared and initialized.
These are high score and low score.
But this time when we declare the
pointer, we use the const qualifier
before the type that we point to.
So score pointer is a pointer
to an integer constant, and we
initialize it to point to high score.
If we attempt to change the
value of the point to two
data, in this case, high score,
we'll get a compiler error.
However, we're free to assign another
address to the pointer and have
it point somewhere else as we do
in the last assignment statement.
In the case of constant pointers, it's
the pointer itself that's constant.
So the data pointed to by the pointer
can be changed via the pointer.
However, the pointer itself
cannot be changed and can't
point to anything else.
Notice that we still use the
const qualifier, however, we
use it before the asterisk
in the pointer declaration.
So we're declaring score pointer
as a const pointer to integer.
All right, let's look
at the last case.
In this case, it's a constant
pointer to constants.
We need to use the const qualifier
twice in the pointer declaration.
So the data pointed to by the
pointer is constant and can't
change, and the pointer itself is
also constant and can't change.
Notice the syntax, score
pointer is a constant pointer
to an integer constant.
In this case, if we try to
modify either the data or the
pointer, we get compiler errors.
The const qualifier is very
useful and it's often used when
passing pointers to functions.
We'll see that in the next video.